macOS: updated package dependencies and gcc support (#134)
syslog-ng/syslog-ng.github.io: doc/_dev-guide/chapter_4/section_2/README.md

At present we are not supporting macOS {{ site.product.short_name }} on our [[official repository|gh-syslog-ng]] on GitHub. However, you can compile {{ site.product.short_name }} yourself following this guide.

**Note:** The guide is tested on ARM macOS Sonoma 14.6.1, Ventura 13.4, and Intel macOS Monterey 12.6.6 machines, we do our bests to keep it update, but your actual system may require additional steps or slightly different settings.
{: .notice}

## Compiling from source

Like every project {{ site.product.short_name }} also uses different libraries and build-systems (a.k.a dependencies) that must be installed for compiling and running properly.

### Dependencies

> The above mentioned dependencies can be satisfied by compiling every-each libs and tools manually, but it might be preferred to do it the easy way. Homebrew and MacPorts are package managers for macOS which has great community and support. You can also use them to install the dependencies you need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above mentioned dependencies can be satisfied by compiling every-each libs and tools manually, but it might be preferred to do it the easy way. Homebrew and MacPorts are package managers for macOS which have great communities and support. You can also use them to install the dependencies you need.
```

   {: .notice}

2. Perform `brew update` if you have not done it yet.

> 3. The following packages should be installed for {{ site.product.short_name }}ng

Reviewer: An extra 'ng' got left here

   * ivykis
   * json-c
   * libtool
   * openssl3
   * pcre2
   * pkg-config
4. The following package might be needed too depending on your macOS version and architecture
   * net-snmp
5. The extra modules would require the following
   * gracle
   * grpc
   * hiredis
   * ~~libdbi~~ - See [bellow](#packages-note)!

>    * ~~libesmtp~~ - See [bellow](#packages-note)!

Reviewer: below with one 'l'

   * python3
   * rabbitmq-c
   * riemann-client
6. Extra development tools you might require
   * criterion

>    * ~~gcc@14~~ - See [bellow](#packages-note)!

Reviewer: Again, one too many 'l's

    autoconf-archive \
    automake \
    bison \
    # Optional, a better replacement of autotools making system
    cmake \
    flex \
    glib \
    # Optional, if you use the internal ivykis source of {{ site.product.short_name }} for building
    ivykis \
    json-c \
    libtool \
    net-snmp \
    openssl3 \
    pcre2 \
    pkg-config \
    # Optional {{ site.product.short_name }} module dependencies
    gradle \
    grpc \
    hiredis \

>     # Do not use the homebrew provided one, see !

Reviewer: See where? I think you wanted a link here

    librdkafka \
    mongo-c-driver \
    python3 \
    rabbitmq-c \
    riemann-client \
    # Optional, needed for unit testing
    criterion \
    # Optional, clang now should compile all modules nicely and it is the oficially supported compiler on macOS
    gcc@14
```

#### Using MacPorts

1. Unlike HomeBrew, Macports does not try to install Xcode which is a hard requirement of a successful build.\
   You can install it e.g. using `xcode-select --install`

2. Install MacPorts on your system.

   **Hint:** Don't forget to set up the MacPorts environment, [[here|macports-inst-detailed]] you can find an even more detailed instruction about the topic.
   {: .notice--info}

3. Perform `port selfupdate` if you have not done it yet.
4. The following packages should be installed for {{ site.product.short_name }}
   * autoconf
   * autoconf-archive
   * automake
   * bison
   * cmake
   * flex
   * glib2
   * ivykis
   * json-c
   * libtool
   * openssl3
   * pcre2
   * pkgconfig
5. The following package might be needed too depending on your macOS version and architecture
   * net-snmp
6. The extra modules would require the following
   * gradle
   * grpc
   * hiredis

>    * ~~libdbi~~ - See [bellow](#packages-note)!

Reviewer: -l

   * libesmtp
   * libmaxminddb
   * libnet
   * librdkafka
   * mongo-c-driver
   * paho.mqtt.c
   * python3
   * rabbitmq-c

>    * ~~riemann-client~~ - See [bellow](#packages-note)!

Reviewer: one too many l

7. Extra development tools you might require
   * criterion

>    * ~~gcc@14~~ - See [bellow](#packages-note)!

Reviewer: Again with the 'l's

Author: this is how copy/paste works

**Hint:** If you have [[{{ site.product.short_name }} installed via MacPorts|dev-inst-macos#installation-via-macports]], as a reference, you can check the dependencies of the MacPorts built version using `port deps syslog-ng`
{: .notice--info}

This is how it might look like if you start from the ground:

```shell
# DO NOT FORGET! Install the MacPorts package first which has a GUI installer. https://www.macports.org/install.php

> # But, you can install it from the comamnd line as well, like

Reviewer: I think it should be 'command'

# WARNING! SET the bellow url and package name according to your needs and OS version !!!
export MACPORTS_PKG_NAME=MacPorts-2.10.1-Sonoma.pkg
export MACPORTS_URL=https://github.com/macports/macports-base/releases/download/v2.10.1/${MACPORTS_PKG_NAME}

wget ${MACPORTS_URL}

sudo installer -pkg "./${MACPORTS_PKG_NAME}" -target

sudo xcode-select --install

sudo port -v selfupdate

sudo port install \
    autoconf \
    autoconf-archive \
    automake \
    bison \
    # cmake - Optional, a better replacement of autotools making system
    flex \
    glib2 \
    # Optional {{ site.product.short_name }} module dependencies
    ivykis \
    json-c \
    libtool \
    openssl3 \
    pcre2 \
    pkgconfig \
    # Optional {{ site.product.short_name }} module dependencies
    gradle \
    grpc \
    hiredis \

>     # Do not use the homebrew provided one, see !

Reviewer: Possible copy error. Might be missing a link

   export PATH=${MACPORTS_PREFIX}/bin:${MACPORTS_PREFIX}/sbin:${MACPORTS_PREFIX}/opt/python/libexec/bin:${PATH}
   ```

2. Force the building process to use bison, net-snmp (and libnet if) installed through MacPorts instead of provided by Apple Developer Tools and macOS.

   Add them to the `${PATH}`

   ```shell
   export PATH=${MACPORTS_PREFIX}/opt/bison/bin:${MACPORTS_PREFIX}/opt/libnet/bin:${MACPORTS_PREFIX}/opt/net-snmp/bin:${PATH}
   ```

   Extend the search path of pkg-config to use the MacPorts version of openssl, net-snmp and pkgconfig

   ```shell
   export PKG_CONFIG_PATH=${MACPORTS_PREFIX}/opt/openssl/lib/pkgconfig:${MACPORTS_PREFIX}/opt/net-snmp/lib/pkgconfig:${MACPORTS_PREFIX}/lib/pkgconfig:${PKG_CONFIG_PATH}
   ```

   Some of the modules will not, or will incorrectly provide pkg-config support (even if added to `PKG\_CONFIG\_PATH`, e.g. libmaxminddb), to help the automatic configurations find them you can add brew to `CFLAGS`, `CPPFLAGS`, and `LDFLAGS`

   ```shell
   export CFLAGS="-I${MACPORTS_PREFIX}/include/ ${CFLAGS}"
   export CPPFLAGS="${CFLAGS} ${CPPFLAGS}"
   export LDFLAGS="-L${MACPORTS_PREFIX}/lib ${LDFLAGS}"
   ```

> **Note:** It could also happen that you must provide here further library inlcude and lib paths, e.g. for openssl 1.1.x, etc.

Reviewer: [optional] "Providing further library paths might be necessary" is a more natural wording

  Java                        : yes
  Java modules                : yes
  afsnmp module               : yes
  eBPF module                 : no
  native bindings             : yes
  Example modules             : yes
```

The modules have the `:yes` status in the list will be compiled and installed. As you installed the required dependencies earlier there is no need to specify the modules you want to enable, the configuretion step will auto enable the modules that have all the dependencies, Of course, you can disable a given module directly if you do not need it (e.g. `--disable-kafka` will disable the kafka modules).

For trying force enable a given module you can use e.g. `--enable-kafka` that will always try to search for all the module dependencies and stop the configuration if any of it is missing.

#### Using cmake

If you have all the above mentioned dependencies installed, for the full (currently supported) feature set you can simply use

```shell
# NOTE: you might want to use the --install-prefix /full_path_of_your/installdir/ parameters as well, see bellow Warning!
cmake --install-prefix /full_path_of_your/installdir -B build . -Wno-dev -DIVYKIS_SOURCE=system --fresh
```

> **Warning:** By a good chance, you might want to install the self built instance first to a custom location to prevent overwriting a possibly already existing installed version. In that case pass `---install-prefix /full_path_of_your/installdir/` parameter to the `cmake` command like you see in the above steps.

Reviewer: I do not understand this  "By a good chance" part, it might not make any sense.  You might want to reword this sentence-
